# Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity
Python weather analysis application that compares the occurrence of severe thunderstorm activity occurring over the continental Unites States (CONUS) to daily international sunspot number measurements. 

## Project Overview:  
December 2019 was confirmed as the starting point of the new solar activity cycle, in which sunspot activity was observed to be at an 11-year minimum. Through the winter and spring of 2020, sunspot number gradually increased with corresponding significant severe thunderstorm outbreaks occurring in the continental United States (CONUS) during February and April 2020.

## Project Goal: 
This study investigates and derives a functional relationship (i.e., correlation) between sunspot number and severe thunderstorm activity over CONUS during the cold season, and compares to the results of previous studies, especially work as published at the Max Planck Institute (Schlegel et al. 2001). The following research questions are addressed:
1. What is the relationship between sunspot number and cold-season severe thunderstorm frequency?
2. How can this relationship be quantified, modeled, and assessed?

## Abstract - Motivation and Background:
The reference date and amplitudes of the minima and maxima of the 11-year solar cycle are established based on the sunspot number maintained and distributed by the SILSO World Datacenter since 1981 at the Royal Observatory of Belgium. Sunspots are dark areas that become apparent at the Sun's photosphere due to intense upward-forced magnetic flux from further within the solar interior, as illustrated in Figure 1. Heating areas along the magnetic flux in the upper photosphere and chromosphere become visible as faculae, causing cooler (7000 F), less dense, and darker areas at the core of these magnetic fields than in the surrounding photosphere (10,000 F). The resulting visible phenomenon is thus seen as sunspots. Active regions associated with sunspot groups are usually visible as bright enhancements in the corona at EUV and X-ray wavelengths. Clette et al. (2014) provide a historical review and perspective of the development and evolution of sunspot number calculation techniques, most notably the International Sunspot Number. Recent studies of the potential impact of sunspot activity on global weather and climate patterns have identified relationships between sunspot number and, collectively, south Asian Monsoon rainfall patterns (Rao 1976) and thunderstorm activity over central Europe (Schlegel et al. 2001). Schlegel et al. (2001), based on a comparison of monthly-averaged sunspot number and lightning stroke frequency, inferred a significant functional relationship between sunspot number and thunderstorm activity over central Europe (R > 0.53, see Figure 2 below). However, this study only focused on warm-season (i.e., April to September) thunderstorm occurrence. Thunderstorm outbreaks during the cold season of the year (i.e., the months of November through March/April) typically occur in environments with low amounts of convective available potential energy (CAPE) and solar heating of the earth's surface. Cold-season severe thunderstorms are often generated by the release of potential instability by large-scale forcing. Thus, another enhancing factor for cold-season severe thunderstorms should be explored to describe storm outbreaks on a regional scale. The period from January to April 2020 exhibited several thunderstorm episodes in CONUS that increased in magnitude with the new solar cycle's commencement. More recently, in November 2020, a marked and significant increase in sunspot activity occurred in which daily sunspot number reached levels observed during the last solar maximum in 2014-2015. Accordingly, November 2020 was a very active month for convective storm activity in CONUS with over 800 storm reports, compared to only 90 storm reports documented for November 2019.

## Datasets:
### See [data folder](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/tree/main/Notebooks/data)
### Input data:
1) Storm Reports via [WxData API](https://wxdata.com/api-storm-reports-explorer) in XML format. 

2) Daily sunspot number values from the [Sunspot Index and Long-term Solar Observations (SILSO)](http://sidc.be/silso/datafiles):
- File [SN_d_tot_V2.0_2019_2020.txt](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/data/SN_d_tot_V2.0_2019_2020.txt) is in the [data](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/tree/main/Notebooks/data) folder with the following format:
  - 365 rows X 4 columns; column 1: year (YYYY), column 2: month (MM), column 3: day (DD), column 4: sunspot number
  
3) Semi-monthly storm report datasets are contained in [wxdata.zip](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/data/wxdata.zip). Please unzip this file to view each individual semi-monthly dataset.

### Output data:
[solar_storm.csv](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/data/solar_storm.csv):
  - 14 rows X 5 columns; column 1: period, column 2: total sunspot number, column 3: storm report number, column 4: mean storm wind speed (mph), column 5: peak storm wind speed (mph)

## Contents:
- A suite of Jupyter notebooks:
- [Thunderstorm_climatology_2020_Report](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/Thunderstorm_climatology_2020_Report.ipynb): Final report that summarizes the outline of the study, results, and conclusions. 
- [thunderstorm_sunspot_datacall](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/thunderstorm_sunspot_datacall.ipynb): Invokes Requests to call the WxData Storm Reports API Builder, data cleaning, and defines a function that builds a storm report listing for each semi-monthly period between November 2019 and April 2020, and November 2020.
- [thunderstorm_sunspot_EDA](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/thunderstorm_sunspot_EDA.ipynb): Reads daily total sunspot number dataset obtained from SILSO, EDA: prints storm report and sunspot number lists for each semi-monthly period, builds a Pandas dataframe of total sunspot number and storm report parameters (report number, mean wind, peak wind).
- [Thunderstorm_climatology_model](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/blob/main/Notebooks/Thunderstorm_climatology_model.ipynb): Builds and trains linear and RANSAC regression models: scatterplot of total sunspot number vs storm report number/peak wind. Conducts principal component analysis on the scatterplots of total sunspot number vs storm report number/peak wind.
- [Background presentation](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorm_Climatology_2020/blob/main/data/JCETpresentation_Pryor_Abtahi.pptx) in [data](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorm_Climatology_2020/tree/main/data) folder.
- Data visualizations in [images](https://github.com/kenpryor67/Severe_Thunderstorms_vs_Sunspot_Activity/tree/main/Notebooks/images) folder.

## Software:
Python:
1) [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)
2) [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/index.html)
3) [Scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html)
